Google Data Analytics - Capstone Project: Case Study A - Cyclistic Bike-Share Analysis
Author: John DC Taylor
Date: July 15th 2025
Introduction
This is the Capstone Project in Google Data Analytics Professional Certificate's Capstone Project.
Scenario
I am supposedly a junior data analyst in the marketing team at Cyclistic, a bike-share company based in in Chicago. Lily Moreno, the director of marketing, believes Cyclistic’s future success depends on maximizing the number of annual members. The annual membership is stated to be “much” more profitable than casual riders. The marketing analyst team is mandated to understand how casual riders and annual members use Cyclistic bikes differently. From these insights, the marketing team will propose a new marketing strategy to convert casual riders into annual members. Cyclistic executives must approve the recommendations.
The company Cyclistic
Cyclistic, a bike-share company, has 5,800 bicycles and 600 docking stations. Cyclistic is slightly different in offering a variety of bikes (reclining, cargo, hand tricycles, etc.) thus making their service more accessible to those with disabilities. Cyclistic also allows users to pick up bikes from one station and return them to another station within the network at their convenience.
Lily Moreno, is the director of marketing and will be key in approving campaigns which would be email, social media, podcasts and other avenues. The Cyclistic executive team is also supposedly very detail oriented.
Until now, Cyclistic's marketing approach revolved around building general awareness and appealing to a wide range of consumer groups. One strategy that apparently has helped has been flexible pricing plans such as single-ride passes, full-day passes and annual memberships.. Customers who elect for single-ride or full-day passes are categorized as casual riders, while those who purchase annual memberships are referred to as Cyclistic members. There is no information about seasonal tickets (e.g. winter season passes).
Moreno is convinced that the key to future growth lies in maximizing the number of annual members. Rather than targeting campaigns on acquiring entirely new customers, Moreno sees a significant opportunity in converting casual riders into full-fledged members. She states that casual riders are already familiar with the Cyclistic program and have chosen Cyclistic for their transportation needs.
Moreno aim is to develop marketing strategies that target the conversion of casual riders into annual members. In order to do this, the marketing analyst team must dig deeper into understanding of the differences between annual members and casual riders, the reasons why casual riders may buy a memberships, and how digital media can also play a part. Moreno and her team would like to  analyse Cyclistic's historical bike trip data to uncover relevant trends and insights.

Data Analysis Phases:
1. Ask
The specific question that the analyst team has been asked is “How do annual members and casual rides use Cyclistic bikes differently.” This is the primary mandate the analyst team has been given. Following this, there are 2 subsequent questions that need to be answered: why would casual riders migrate to annual membership and how can digital media play a part in enabling this migration. This is a clear statement of the business task.
The marketing analyst team is expected to produce a report with the following deliverables:
1.	A clear statement of the business task.
2.	A description of the sources used.
3.	Documentation of any cleaning or manipulation of data.
4.	A summary of our analysis.
5.	Supporting visualizations and key findings.
6.	The top 3 recommendations based on the analysis.
The Google Data Analytics course provides a Roadmap as a guide to this case study. This will be broadly followed. 
With respect to Ask of the analytic procedure, we have to rely on the information we have been provided by Google and cannot expect any more from stakeholders.

2. Prepare
As I wanted to keep my options open, I downloaded Divvy 2019 Q1 and Divvy 2020 Q1 in the hope of being able to use R Visualisations. This did have the negative of not having seasonal data but it does allow one to look at year-on-year comparisons. But the lack of seasonality, serious uploading times to RStudio, poor quality of data in Q2 2020, pushed me back to the 12 months record of Cyclistic data. And, after coming across UNION non-compliance, US versus EU storage issues, I finally managed to get 12 months data in BigQuery.  
The ROCCC guidelines as expounded by Google have been used for the data:
-	Data is public and deemed to be reliable;
-	The data is sourced directly and is deemed to be original;
-	The data is comprehensive;
-	Data is current ;
-	And, as Google says so, it is cited;
3. Process and 4. Analyse
The 12 csv files were initially downloaded to Excel. They were changed to CVS format
The files were a little large for Excel to cope with, so SQL was used any further the data cleaning, validation, analysis, etc.
Please refer to capstone SQL_queries for all SQL code, SQL query results, etc.








5. Share 


 
The average ride time between causal riders and member riders was roughly in the ratio of two to one.  While there was a slight uptick for riders during the weekend, there was also an uptick for member riders although perhaps not to the same extent. However, statistically speaking, it would not be strictly accurate to say the weekend usage was one of the difference between the casual riders and the members. However, it is clear that the average usage of casual riders is approximately double that of the members. While there is not a clear idea of how pricing is implemented, if there is a standard price per ride which is independent of time, it could explain why the members are much more profitable for Cyclistics.

 

The stacked bar chart clearly indicates that usage among members is pretty consistent throughout the year, including the winter months of December, Janaury and February. By contrast, trip times for the casual riders picks up for the spring and summer months, starting a decline as the fall season plays out.
 
The chart above has the type of pattern one would expect for the casual rider with the numbers picking up nicely in spring and falling off in the fall. However, the numbers for members are a source for concern. Perhaps the eliminating the NULLS (which were primarily NULL values in the Station_Start/End _Names/ID should not have been put in effect. In total 1,428,498 rows were removed our of an initial 5,473,278 rows.
While perhaps this is not necessarily a subject for this paper, data from June 2024 onwards could not be used because the scheme changed radically and the TIMESTAMP was replaced by STRINGS. Regretfully, this was not just a change of name as the string could not be converted to TIMESTAMP and was basically in the form of HH:MM.s. Likewise, the data for 2019 and Q1 2020 also could not be selected as the schemas were also different with some additional columns. 
 
In summary, approximately members take almost double of the rides of casuals. There are no docked bikes used by members and maybe this is also a relatively high cost area given members provide more profit. 

6. Act 
The financial side was not a part of the mandate. The main question as to determine how Members and Casual drivers use Cyclistic differently. The subsequent questions on how to get casual members to convert to being full members and what marketing campaigns can be considered, should have to take into account the financial side which was basically the single assertion that members were much more profitable than casual members. Thus possible strategies could be:
1.	If one refers to the pie chart of members versus casual riders one sees that roughly 2/3rds of trips are members and 1/3 casual. If one considers members are much more profitable then possible 75%-80% of profits are generated by members. So the pricing for members should be protected which there is much more leeway for casual riders. In fact, one could even perhaps consider pricing for casual riders to make the gap between paying as a casual member and being a member is less onerous.
2.	Maybe consider a fall/winter semi-member promotion which is at a fair discount to full membership so one can boost fall/winter rides. Maybe 40% price of full membership instead of half price for the 6 months from November to April.
3.	Advertise around student areas (it makes no sense to advertise in tourist areas as tourists won’t become members). Students in time will get jobs and be susceptible to membership then.
4.	There is a seasonal effect and the statistics showed while casual riders declined by quite a bit from spring/summer and early fall (this is validated by Cyclistic monthly data). Thus, it can be argued that in fact that the numbers have to be boosted by increased rides over the winter period. There is sufficient evidence to suggest that members do use the services during winter and thus the Marketing Director would appear to be correct by converting casual riders to members so they, in a sense, feel obliged to use the services in the winter or colder months.
5.	There seems little point in advertising around Chicago tourist attractions instead of trying to determine where there is most likelihood of finding casual riders who may become members in due course. It is clear that many members have a fairly consistent usage with fewer seasonal variation. Maybe make a strong advertising campaign on the student community as they will be the ones who will join the workforce and need to commute. 



 
